---
layout: post
title:  "Learning"
date:   2014-11-06
---

<p>Last week I finished a course on Coursera about learning. For one month I managed to understand quite interesting and exciting topics about effective studying. Yeah, some of them were already familiar to me, but having someone reassure you about your understanding is quite good! I'm going to try and recap the knwoledge I acquired in an effort to understand and apply the material better.</p>

<p>First of all, <a href="http://www.ted.com/talks/arianna_huffington_how_to_succeed_get_more_sleep">sleep</a>, exercise and proper breathing are the most important things for a successful and well-working mind. By not getting enough sleep, you prevent your brain from  washing away the toxins it has accumulated during the day. Also, during sleep the brain reherses new ideas and strengthens memories. In fact you're actively learning when you're sleeping. This leads to having a bogged down and inefficient mind the day after. By <a href="http://www.health.harvard.edu/newsletters/Harvard_Mental_Health_Letter/2009/May/Take-a-deep-breath">breathing with your belly</a>, you calm your mind and provide your body with huge amounts of oxygen. Exercise is also very important because it really makes you not thinking about the problems you were working on. Your mind can focus on the physical activity and let the subconscious do the rest.</p>

<p>Speaking of this, focusing and defocusing your brain is a really important part in learning. Strong-focus sessions should be followed by relaxation and just wandering off to wherever your mind wants to. For example, if you find yourself struggling with a problem, you should concentrate on it a bit more and after that go for a walk or just sit back and try  thinking about something else. After a while the solution will pop into your mind.</p>

<p>You should also know how to acquire information effectively. By simply reading you're not being very productive. You should always recall what you've read and focus on the parts you weren't able to recall successfully. Here's a little exercise for you - after reading this article get a <strong>pen</strong> and a <strong>sheet of paper</strong> and write down everything you've understood from it. The next time you're trying to learn something don't just reread it but actively recall the accumulated knowledge. Test yourself on every occasion and don't be afraid to make mistakes. In fact mistakes are a very important part of the learning process.</p>

<p>Also, <a href="http://www.nytimes.com/2011/01/21/science/21memory.html?_r=0">a study</a> shows that students who have only recalled what they've read after focusing on a given text perform way better at memorizing the material than students who created complex concept maps of the subject at hand. By seemingly studying less, you're actually being more effective.</p>

<p>Another useful technique is to chunk information. Chunks are basically logical pieces of knowledge which could be assembled in such ways as to create bigger chunks. A chunk is a thing you can easily hold into your brain. It's like knowing how to tie your shoes - you first learned and understood the basic steps about it, and after a while, with  some deliberate practice, you started no longer to think about these steps but just do the knot. By chunking you free your brain from details and let it run in the big picture.</p>

<p>To form a chunk you should first understand the material that's behind it. You should be able to explain and easily solve problems related to that information. After you've done that you should practice using the chunk until you've mastered it. After all this you can put it in the bigger context of other chunks and pieces of data.</p>

<p>It's actually quite a good idea to have chunks from many different fields. This way, you'll create seemingly unrelated links between subjects and be able to think more creatively about problems. You should also mix chunks - don't only solve problems related to a single technique but work on many techniques at once.</p>

<p>Procrastination is another problem many people face during learning. No matter how interesting a subject may be to you, there will be times when you'll approach learning about it with reluctance. Your mind will try really hard to avoid it and do something seemingly more interesting instead. You can fix this by simply noticing such clues and changing your response for them. For example, the next time you're learning, just set a timer at 25 minutes and learn during that interval. After that, reward yourself with something small like a cup of hot chocolate, little browsing through the web, a healthy snack or just plain relaxation. After that do another 25 minute session and give yourself another reward. This is known as <a href="http://pomodorotechnique.com/">The Pomodoro technique</a>. The reward is very important! This way you teach your brain that after doing that seemingly boring action, you will feel good. Another important thing you should do to change a habit of yours is to change your beliefs about it. If you find yourself thinking "I'll always be doing that..." or "I'm not gifted to do maths...", for example, try finding people who have changed their beliefs and are showing progress doing something they thought they weren't good at.</p>

<p>If you're feeling overwhelmed by a task you have to do, you shouldn't focus on completing it. Instead you should focus on the process which will help you finish the task. Dedicate some time, work your ass off and don't care if you succeed in the end. The important thing will be that you'll be one step closer to completion and you'll be happy about it.</p>

<p>Another good way to tackle procrastination is to mix topics of learning. For example, focus on a problem for some time, then switch to another subject and so on. This way you're enjoying variety and tend not to get bored so easily by the task at hand. Becareful not to multitask, though. Do one thing at a time and eliminate all other distractions. Multitasking only harms your thinking capabilities.</p>

<p>Taking tests is another matter. There's <a href="http://www4.ncsu.edu/unity/lockers/users/f/felder/public/Columns/memo.pdf">a really cool checklist</a> you can work through in order to find whether you're properly prepared for a test.</p>

<p>A really good test-taking technique is to go first at the harder problems. You should take a look at the paper, find out the harder tasks, choose one and start working on it. If you struggle for a minute or two, you should switch to the easier tasks and do some of them. After that, go for another harder task and so on. By working this way you constantly refocus your brain and make it work on the harder tasks in the background while being motivated by solving the easier exercises. This is an example of the switch between focused and defocused modes of thinking I wrote about in the third paragraph.</p>

<p>Organized study groups are also very important for successful learning. Note though, that if some of the participants arrive late and aren't serious about this, it's better not to study at all. Think twice about the people you're going to study with! It's OK to have a party but do it after you've worked through the problems and the material. It's also important to have someone smarter in the group who is going to help you with the aspects you don't understand. The other plus about study groups is that you can use other people to make reality checks about your knowledge. You just have to be open to critique and evaluate it. If something's wrong, change it.</p>

<p>When learning new and abstract material you should make analogies as much as possible. That's quite intuitive but the problem is that most people just don't do it. Involve as much of your senses as possible. Use visual images, noise and smell to associate with the subject. Find creative analogies to the thing you're working on. <strong>However, it's really important to validate these analogies.</strong></p>

<p>Do much practice. Don't look at problem solutions but do your best to solve the exercises you have. If you have difficulties consult with your teacher. Use your resources - the Internet, the books, the papers, the videos, the study groups, the forums, the  Q&amp;As, the teachers. Most importantly, when you think you've mastered a subject, go and teach it to people. Only this way you'll really understand it. By teaching you try to explain things and often during this explanation you find out that there are topics you still don't understand well. If you don't have the opportunity to teach, write then. That's the main reason I'm writing this blog post - to understand better the ways of efficient learning.</p>

<p>It's also important to study less but with more focus. Instead of just spending 2 hours rereading a topic, spend 1 hour actively recalling the material. You'll feel more tired after it, but you'd have learned more in that one hour, than in the two hours spent feeling like doing work.</p>

<p>Use TODO lists and organize them the evening before. This way your brain can prepare about the tasks you'll have to do the next day while you're sleeping. It's also very important to set a quiting time - an hour which defines when you stop doing work/learning. It's no argument that you've got tight schedule and simply can't put such an hour. There are examples of people who really had tighter schedules and tougher material to learn than you and did do work/learning for 7-8 hours a day and rested very actively after that. Know, however, that if you're trying to work on too many things at once you'll really lack the time to do so. When you notice this, either cut one subject or think twice the next time you're excited about a new endeavor. This currently happens to me, so I can sincerely tell you that it doesn't work. You may feel productive but the quality of the acquired knowledge won't be much.</p>

<p>Last but not least, know that you can practically learn anything if you try hard enough. Also, don't think that you have only one talent and you have to go after it. Try new things, learn new concepts, go out of your field into something completely different. Broaden your contacts, environment, the things you like. Variety makes us happy and variety leads us to success. Don't be a tight specialist. Have interests in one field but don't be afraid to try other things. By doing this you broaden your working context and can use really different ideas to solve really hard problems. Be a polymath, not a grumpy specialist. There are lots of examples about successful people who have  interests in many and diverse fields. In fact, you can try reading <a href="http://aeon.co/magazine/culture/anyone-can-learn-to-be-a-polymath/">this interesting article</a>. It's written by a guy who's a writer, poet and explorer living in Cairo, Egypt.</p>

<p>Simply put, you're everything you want to be. Just work <em>smart and hard</em> and don't let despair make you quit.</p>
