---
layout: post
title: "Cycles of rest and dynamics"
date: 2016-09-30
---

I wanted to achieve a lot during this week. I wanted to help
[Camplight](https://camplight.net) grow as a business, I wanted to code, I
wanted to buy a motorbike, I wanted to put to an end a project I'm long ago
tired of, I wanted to continue learning AI, I wanted to be social. These are
quite many tasks and to do them all, I got the spectacular idea to get up
early and going to bed a bit late. It turned out that such an idea ain't so
spectacular after all. On the third day of the week, I achieved some mistakes
and some of the so-called burnout.

I'm fortunate enough to be conscious of what happens to my body and mind. I'm
not sure that fortune is the correct word, though, but let's presume we have
control over nothing. This consciousness alerts me quite soon when something
good or bad is deemed to happen. It has helped me quite many times to notice
when I'm overstressed, overexited, indulged in meaningless dreams or just
being plain unreal. It has helped me to be mindful of this week's happenings.
Otherwise, I would've continued the unproductive, damaging, unhappy regime I
had put myself into.

The interesting thing about all this, is that it's not the first time I've put
myself into such a regime. Actually, now I notice that I live in cycles of
deep desire for work and stress, followed by want for rest and lazyness. It's
an interesting pseudo-balance, in which I'm fortunate that the
rest-and-lazyness parts don't occur for too long periods, otherwise I would
achieve nothing.

Given the fact that the following week begins my final year in university, I
have to be more thoughtful about my rest and productivity. Doing many things
and not putting Quality in any of them is not productivity. Sleeping less
hours and having people pity you because you "work so hard" ain't
productivity, it's just plain attention-whoring. Doing more without reflecting
on the ways you do it rarely leads to prosperity and success (whatever these
words' definition might be). Not being able to drop your opportunities leads
you to a condition of no-direction, livingless being.

So, I'd like to state a simple principle:

> Opportunities always arise if you want them. What's important then, is not
> blindly trying to catch each opportunity, but thoughtfully reject what seems
> great, but won't really lead you to greatness in the long term.

If I am to apply this principle, I should not go into too many elective
courses in university, I should mainly concentrate of bringing value to
Camplight by developing Quality software and improving my communication and
engineering skills, and I should invest time in learning AI only when I really
have the cognitive power of doing so. Everything else should wait, unless I
really feel like I want to do it.

That'd be an interesting experiment to try.
